Custom plugin documentation (#1222)
Redocly/redocly-cli: docs/custom-plugins/custom-decorators.md

# Decorators in plugins

Decorators transform API descriptions, by adding, removing, or changing elements of the document. Before you build your own decorators:

> * [learn about Redocly decorators](../decorators.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Learn about Redocly decorators](../decorators.md)
```

> * [check the list of built-in decorators](../decorators.md#list-of-decorators)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Check the list of built-in decorators](../decorators.md#list-of-decorators)
```

> If you didn't find an existing decorator that fit your needs, then adding a decorator in a plugin is a good way to proceed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you can't find an existing decorator that fits your needs, then you can add a decorator in a plugin.
```

:::warning Preprocessors

Decorators and preprocessors are the same in structure, but preprocessors are run _before_ linting, and decorators are run after. We always recommend using decorators where possible, since the document might not be valid or structured as expected if the linting step hasn't run yet.

:::

## Plugin structure

> In order to create a preprocessor or decorator, the object that is exported from your module has to conform to the following interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a preprocessor or decorator, the object that is exported from your module has to conform to an interface such as the following example:
```

```js
module.exports = {
  id: 'my-local-plugin',
  preprocessors: {
    oas3: {
      "processor-id": () => {
        // ...
      }
    }
  },
  decorators: {
    oas3: {
      "decorator-id": () => {
        // ...
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Each decorator or preprocessor is a function that returns an object. The object's keys are the node types in the document, and each of those can contain any or all of the `enter()`, `leave()` and `skip()` functions for that node type. More information and examples on the [visitor pattern page](./visitor.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each decorator or preprocessor is a function that returns an object. The object's keys are the node types in the document, and each of those can contain any or all of the `enter()`, `leave()` and `skip()` functions for that node type. Find more information and examples on the [visitor pattern page](./visitor.md).
```

## Decorator example

To give a small (but fun) example, here is a decorator that adds a sparkle emoji ✨ at the start of every operation description.

To help keep the plugin code organized, this example uses one file per decorator. In this example, this is the file `plugins/decorators/operation-sparkle.js`:

```js
module.exports = OperationSparkle;

function OperationSparkle() {
  console.log("adding sparkles ... ");
  return {
    Operation: {
      leave(target) {
        if(target.description) {
          target.description = "✨ " + String(target.description);
        }
      }
    },
  }
};
```

> Decorators use the [visitor pattern](./visitor.md) to run an operation on every node in the document. In this example, when the code does `leave()` of an `Operation` node, it checks if the node (passed as `target` in this example) has a description, and updates it if it does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decorators use the [visitor pattern](./visitor.md) to run an operation on every node in the document. In this example, when the code executes the `leave()` function on the `Operation` node, it checks if the node (passed as `target` in this example) has a description, and updates it if it does.
```

> Decorators use the [visitor pattern](./visitor.md) to run an operation on every node in the document. In this example, when the code executes the `leave()` function on the `Operation` node, it checks if the node (passed as `target` in this example) has a description, and updates it if it does.

Reviewer 2: question: Do you have to use `target` or can it be replaced with any string, such as `op`? I'm not clear for example if this also works:

```js
module.exports = OperationSparkle;

function OperationSparkle() {
  console.log("adding sparkles ... ");
  return {
    Operation: {
      leave(op) {
        if(op.description) {
          op.description = "✨ " + String(op.description);
        }
      }
    },
  }
};
```

Author: yes, I tried to use "target" in an attempt to make it a bit more copy/paste friendly, but called out that it was just an example, so I think it's clear.

Now extend the decorator from the previous example to add this to the existing plugin in `plugins/sparkle.js`:

```js
const OperationSparkle = require('./decorators/operation-sparkle.js');
const OpIdSuffix = require('./decorators/add-suffix.js');

module.exports = {
  id: 'sparkle',
  decorators: {
    oas3: {
      'operation-sparkle': OperationSparkle,
      'add-opid-suffix': OpIdSuffix,
    }
  }
};
```

All that remains is for a user to configure this decorator in their `redocly.yaml` configuration file to take advantage of the new decorator functionality. Here's an example of the configuration file:

```yaml
plugins:
  - plugins/sparkle.js

decorators:
  sparkle/operation-sparkle: on
  sparkle/add-opid-suffix:
    suffix: ButShinier
```

With this configuration, an `operationId` called `GetAllItems` would be rewritten as `GetAllItemsButShinier`. You can choose a more sensible suffix for your use case as appropriate.

## Further examples of custom decorators

See some more examples of decorators:
- Follow our [replace-servers-url tutorial](../guides/replace-servers-url.md).
- Change your [OAuth2 token URL](../guides/change-token-url.md).

## Preprocessors

> Preprocessors follow the same structure and operation as decorators, but they are run before the validation/linting step. This makes them brittle because the document may not be valid, and the extra processing step can cause performance impacts. We recommend looking for alternative approaches to preprocessing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preprocessors follow the same structure and operation as decorators, but they are run before the validation/linting step. Running before the validation/linting step makes them brittle because the document may not be valid, and the extra processing step can cause performance impacts. We recommend looking for alternative approaches to preprocessing.
```
